---
title: 02 How have we developed philosophically
tags: [Notebooks/Philosophy/Paper 3, phil]
created: '2021-01-07T14:20:12.574Z'
modified: '2021-10-31T22:09:35.221Z'
---

# 02 How have we developed philosophically
paragraph written about my position on philosophy

15 minute paragraph rewritten
Philosophy is an activity aiming towards increasing understanding by a systematic system of thinking. This subject of understanding is not as important as the way in which it is reached, by being separate to other systems of increasing understanding. This method is primarily done critical and conceptual analysis requiring reaching a reasonable conclusion which is justified. This therefore separates it from disciplines such as the sciences, where empirical verification and falsification, with non-conceptual analysis of physically observable events, are used to reach a justified and reasonable conclusion.

A further distinction is that the systematic method used may be different, as the way in which a conceptual analysis is perceived as justified or reasonable is dependent on prior systems and analysis of these systems. Therefore the method used to reach a greater understanding forms a system of conceptual analysis around its subject. This means there may be competing systems around an analysed event, such as different uses of systems used to justify types of utilitarianism, or different systems when compared to different ethical theories such as deontological ones. So it is possible that one use conceptual analysis and reach greater understanding in a different way, such as different interpretation of historical events, and it not be philosophy as it does not generate a system but simply uses different ones; philosophy would instead analyse the systems around what history is, making claims about the system itself. Another difference would be that as the activity, philosophy would be the process itself and not the resulting claims; the result would be a philosophical system or philosophical knowledge, whereas the process towards reaching this is philosophy.

This generation of different systems and analysis of them in an activity functions to provide a basis for what to believe. The system or knowledge left may be used to build upon something else or make a decision over another. As philosophy is simply the process and use of the method, it has no fixed purpose--because its purpose comes separately to the action of philosophy. The purpose or aim of philosophy is then very variable, allowing the philosopher doing it to place within it their own intentions, so many different areas can be the subject of philosophy. For example, if one reads work from Nietzsche’s middle period where he focuses on philosophy as a therapeutic life-affirming solution to life-denying nihilism by providing a way of life, it can be considered philosophy due to its use of reasoning resulting in consideration and generation of a system by the person doing the philosophy, not because of its aims but by the way they are attempted. However, the generation of some system could be seen as part of the aim of philosophy in that successful philosophy will produce some system, so while it may not be what is *aimed at*--or what the philosopher is trying to do in pursing philosophy--it can be said to be the aim or nature of good philosophy to produce this.
