---
title: 03 Act 1
tags: [en, Notebooks/English/texts/Jerusalem]
created: '2020-11-30T09:03:13.132Z'
modified: '2021-03-10T22:25:54.859Z'
---

# 03 Act 1

The Holy Fool:
- Out of society but become asociated with some holy wisdom by others
- E.g. St Basil in Russia (?)

perhaps Rooster in some way. But more so the holy fool of the people, he may not have any wisdom i.e. it is the others who make Rooster a holy fool in some way

A slight cult of personality around Rooster?

Rooster has the fool's licence: he is able to say things because he is "just pissing about" and speaking nonesense, otherwise he wouldn't be able to.

The fool in King Lear: the fool stops being tolerated and is never heard of again, Rooster has stopped being tolerated by the Council. However, Rooster is never wanted (unlike the fool) he is simply tolerated.


## Literary/mythological allusions
- Robin Hood
- St George and the Dragon
- King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table
- Phaedra: mythology
- Byron - Lord Byron: Romantic Poet (known as a wild man, outrageous life)
- Midsummer Night's Dream, Henry IV (Falstaff)
- Jerusalem - William Blake
- Fagin (Oliver Twist)

Butterworth rejects intentionally including allusion other than St George and the Dragon, but does not reject different interpretations.
- maybe inherited knowledge/collective unconscious though. so hehe
- idea of archetypes

He also rejects the play being a "State of England" play. (but you could maybe argue it has become one? idk)

"I think Blake's song and my play are both celebrations and lamentations at the same time of a lost state" (because of the title "Jerusalem")

