---
title: '47 R: M1'
tags: [Notebooks/Philosophy/Descartes]
created: 2022-01-24T12:33:03.136Z
modified: 2022-02-23T11:45:06.535Z
---

# 47 R: M1
## Doubt
Qu will probably go into the method itself or what it attempts to produce.

1. Empiricism vs Rationalism
2. Med 4 (*perhaps*. Q/context dependent)
3. Rejection of Scholastic Science/empiricism
4. Methodology, Cartesian skepticism.
5. If Qu has "certainty", then cogito.

Waves
1. Sensory Doubt
    - The senses cannot be trusted to give certain information, sensate impressions can be doubted as they are often wrong.
   - “Whatever I have up till now accepted as most true I have acquired either from the senses or through the senses”,therefore it is necessary to reestablish the foundation
   - "it is prudent to doubt those who have deceived us even once". We can be mistaken due to sensory data, such as of the real size of something (e.g. sun) or shape (tower appears flat but is curved)
    - Necessity of doubt in understanding if anything is true
2. Dream Argument
   - When in a dream, reality and dreams are not distinguishable. There is no guarantee that what we experience is reality and not something fabricated.
   - Justify need to doubt to know anything and that doubting senses of something is not enough, doubting 
3. Painter's Analogy
   - A painter may create an imaginary landscape, but the colours used still exist even if what they represent/appear to be does not
   - There are some things which must constitute our experiences, even if they are fabricated, and logical truths are true "whether I am awake, or asleep, two and three added together are five".
   - Justifies D's argument that nothing can be certain except logical truths like mathematics
4. Deceiving God Hypothesis
   - It could hypothetically be the case that God has made it that "I go wrong every time I add two and three... or even in some even simpler matter"
5. Defective Origins Hypothesis
   - "since deception and error seem to be imperfections, the less powerful they make my original cause"
   - Hypothetically God doesn't exist. Therefore I exist by change, causation, or otherwise. Deception and error are present. Therefore I have imperfections.
## Purpose of M1
Synopsis/Dedicatory Letter: "reasons are provided which give us possible grounds for doubt of all things" "eventual result of this doubt is to make it possible that we have no further doubt".

Thought experiment. Hyperbolic. For realisation, not conclusion: it is not something you do all the time, but once to realise the error in foundations.

To justify everything which follows. Descartes wants to show that the previous is flawed and thus justify the need for a new "First Philosophy". 


## How does M1 fulfil D's larger purpose
Rejection of Scholastic Science (Socrates+Catholicism, Aquinas), promotion of rationalism.
Allows to establish scope and what will be counted as certainty/knowledge. The external world (body/sensate realm) is doubtable; later on in M2 the internal mind/soul is knowable.
Atheist/theist distinction in deceiving god and defective origins.

A realisation for both the atheist and the theist.

## Evaluation of methodological doubt

1. Empiricism vs. knowledge
    - Inherent in the methodological tool (in the way Descartes is using it), doubt is a rejection of sense perception
    - Is Doubt pointless? because sense perception gives knowledge
2. Is Doubt actually self-defeating, does doubt defeat itself? Nature of Doubt
3. Is Doubt pointless? because it (itself) gives no knowledge?
    - Even if Doubt is not self-defeating, then does it actually give knowledge?
    - Doubt only clarifies what is already known by other means, and sorts into two sets of indubitable and doubtable.
4. Inconsistent application of doubt? Scope and (failure of) Application of Doubt.
    - Does Descartes impose an artificial limit on Doubt? (i.e. I will doubt to this point but not past this line I have drawn)
    - Does Descartes' consistently doubt
5. Gassendi: is it truly the senses which err? Are the senses not a passive function which provide information as-is, and the mind interpret them and makes an incorrect judgement? The senses correct judgement, inductive empiricism/pragmatism.
    - You receive incomplete knowledge, but what you receive you receive perfectly, it is not wrong.
    - D's Response: yes, but you receive incomplete knowledge which can be doubted. This is not wrong knowledge, but it is incomplete which means it can be doubted. 
    - Senses correct other senses which appear wrong, example of refraction of a straight rod in water.
    - D's response: the senses do not correct, you get clashing perception. Senses do not have any sort of autonomy, it is the mind which chooses which of these senses is the correct one from among the clashing ones.
    - Aristotelian Scholastic Science: The four causes, motion, Aquinas, self-correction by the senses due to the Anima.

NOTE:
CDP is not certainty. He takes that something perceived clearly and distinctly "is true", not certain. The *cogito* is certain, CDP are true. 
