---
title: 52 R꞉ M6
tags: [Notebooks/Philosophy/Descartes]
created: 2022-03-23T11:40:30.264Z
modified: 2022-03-25T10:13:20.793Z
---

# 52 R꞉ M6

1. The intellect in M6 is the entire thinking process (used in the act of making judgement), involving the passive vessel, will, ideas, judgement.

2. A clear and distinct perception is 



Descartes' can *imagine* a triangle and in doing so *understand* its nature.

Descartes' cannot imagine a chiliagon, but *can* understand its nature.

Imagination is distinct from the intellect. The intellect requires nothing other than the mind/self; the imagination must depend on something beyond the mind/self: it must rely on external things such as sense perceptions.

"When the mind understands, it in some way turns towards itself and inspects one of the ideas which are within it; but when it imagines, it turns towards the body and looks at something in the body which conforms to an idea understood by the mind or perceived by the senses."

The imagination would consist of the mind turning towards the body (which interact with the world through sense perceptions) and apprehending resemblances of things perceived by the senses.


Understanding is the pure intellection on ideas: understanding an idea. Judged to be in or not in formal reality.

Imagination is the use of sense perception to make new ideas. It is not pure intellection; it must rely on sense perceptions to come up with these new ideas (ideas must come from something, so they cannot be spontaneously made up).


Sensations come from outside me (59-60)
Sensations come from outside me (60-61) 
Sensations originate in matter (61-63)
Material objects possess mathematical and geometric properties (63-66) [primary and secondary qualities discussed but not mentioned outright]

1. Has D actually reached formal reality? (has he reached the result he purports to have reached?)
- He thinks he has glimpsed primary quality

2. Has D made any (seeming) assumptions?

3. Has D made any leaps in logic?


> To have recourse to the veracity of the Supreme Being, in order to prove the veracity of our senses, is surely making a very unexpected circuit. If his veracity were at all concerned in this matter, our senses would be entirely infallible; because it is not possible that he can ever deceive.

Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
i.e. why do we need to meander between senses of representational reality and do all this reasoning to catch glimpses of formal reality, why would we not just have truth if God made us?

Descartes' purports to give an answer to this in M4's error theory (secretly Augustine's theodicy :p). However, one may question this theodicy, it is subject to much criticism; furthermore, is it not overly complex, is it not more simple for us to just have truth given by God (secretly arguing that there is therefore no God)?

Descartes' is using the much loved Catholic gift of ratio to find truth and God, which it is good to do, because he is Catholic.



Kant.
Phenomenal: Things as they are perceived.
Noumenal: The World as it really is.

Kant says we cannot pierce into the noumenal. For two main reasons:
1. 	Synthetic -> recourse to real world to prove
		a priori  -> truth without recourse to sense perception

	One example of synthetic a priori is 1+1=2. For Kant, you do not look at the contents of 1, +, =, 2 and just by looking at the concept's essence proving it. You must recourse to the world and to intuition of the world to find it; the concept of "1" is world-bound, it refers to a singularity which is known through the particular existence of something.
2. Humans are imperfect reasoners.

Everything you do requires recourse to the world (synthetic) to exemplify, understand, and therefore prove it. Humans are imperfect reasoners who cannot go past a certain roadblock.
