---
title: ch 07-11
tags: [en, Notebooks/English/texts/Candide]
created: '2020-12-04T15:18:44.815Z'
modified: '2021-03-10T22:25:54.863Z'
---

# ch 07-11

## Context- treatment of Jews in Portugal
- 1492: spain exiled jewish population as part of Spanish Inquisition
- many fled to portugal, where their rights were given and taken away by a succession of monarchs. They had no stability nor guarantee of thier rights or freedom.

### Anti-semitism
- banned from many professions and positions of power.
- therefore many worked in trading or in money-lending.
- this led to the anti-Semitic idea of Jews being greedy, mercantile, and unseemly.
- also suspected of being a corruptive and satanic force, poisoning wells and communion wine, killing Christian babies to use their blood in black magic rituals, and seducing and tarnishing the honour of Christian women.

- during the englightenment, many countires began to enact religious *tolerance* laws.
- intellectuals begun to consider anti-Semitic laws as an example of the church having too much power and influence over the state.


## 8
- third person -> first person
- "artless simplicity"
- graphic
- detatched tone
- similar to Pangloss' description
- lack of personal subject

- Bulgar captain -> hypocricy
  - lambasts soldier for raping Cunégonde, but does the same
  - demands respect of soldier but not very respectful
  - "not much wit", "not been educated by Doctor Pangloss" (19)   } what use is this education?

- "a person of honour may be raped once, but her virtue emerges all the stronger for it"  (19)
  - something bad having good consequences does not make the bad neccessary or justified or good
  - something bad has good effects; leibnizian necessity
  - suffering > slight increase in vague traits

p20
- hypocricy of religion
- abuse of power
- auto-da-fé is not being used by the Grand Inquisitor for a greater spiritual purpose, but for personal gain
- lack of religious morality (link to inquisition agent, francisian & jesuit [syphilus])
- instead of focusing on their values and substance, they argue about particulars and ridiculous theological details
  - useless philsophy: in this case theology
- Candide and Cunégonde describe things as horrific and bad, and express surprise at how these are allowed to happen in this best of possible worlds. Yet they still try to justify why this it is actually wrong
  - "I praised God for bringing you back to me"
- traditional Christian ideas of forgiveness and nonretaliation not followed, e.g. Candide's killing of the 2 people
  - necessary choice of two evils
  - how choices are not always black and white
- "If Pangloss had not been hanged..."
  - irony
  - inconcistency and hypocricy of Candide's philosophy

- different in treatment is due to perception, not behaviour. e.g. Inquisitor burried in a beautiful dome and Jew in a heap



## Question:
Discuss in reference to *Candide, or Optimism*: "A satirical novel can never suceed in both satire and realism."

By nature of the genre, a satire can not suceed in both satire and realism. To satirise is to corrupt by a force of mockery and gross exagerration to the extreme to display the subject of satitire as equally or analogically ridiculous. In *Candide*, Voltaire satires the leibnizian philosophy of Optimism held by Candide and taught by Pangloss; the immense suffering and ridiculousness of the justifications made by Candide, Cunégonde, and Pangloss for the surprise at how their a posteriori experience does not fit with a best of possible worlds is such an example. In this, Voltaire is succesful in satire. Although one can easily make the case for the realism of the novel's events, being rooted in historical knowledge of what occured, it is not a succesful realism of what it satires.



