---
tags: [en/texts/Wuthering Heights]
title: ch 06-7
created: '2021-03-02T13:00:35.585Z'
modified: '2021-03-08T11:11:37.570Z'
---

# ch 06-7
## How does Hindley change during his three years away from Wuthering Heights? What is the significance of this? (p. 46) 

Commanding, desires to change WH for himself 

Change in dress 

Aware of class and propriety  

Resentment and jealousy due to father’s treatment of Heathcliff -> revenge on Heathcliff 

“degrading himself past redemption” – doesn’t try to improve himself morally and break the cycle of abuse and resentment – no attempt to improve morally, only socially 

Showing off authority and power 

Tyrannical 

## How does life at Wuthering Heights change after Hindley’s return?  

Heathcliff’s status in the house is reduced and ruined – banned from education, he becomes a servant/labourer (one of “the other servants”) 

Locks Heathcliff and Catherine out on the moors – symbolic of him locking them out of his new life and C and H’s exclusion from respectable Victorian society  

Becomes tyrannical and more abusive

## What are our first impressions of Thrushcross Grange? Are these reliable? (p. 48) 

To Catherine and Heathcliff it's conspicuous, isolated, mysterious, strange. 

Opposite to WH’s wildness – Thrushcross grange and its inhabitants described as sheltered 

Heathcliff’s biased narrative – looks down on TG (bias) and spies on them (outsider) 

## Look at the Linton family’s reaction to Heathcliff on p. 49 - 51. Is Heathcliff presented sympathetically? Why/why not? 

Heathcliff is aggressive and negative, but due to his own mistreatment, as exemplified at TG 

Disrespect, cold towards him – let the dogs attack him and only express regret when they see the dog has bitten Catherine 

“out-and-outer”, “the robbers”, “you foulmouthed thief”  

Prejudice, abuse Heathcliff faces 

## In your opinion, is Heathcliff’s immorality and darkness innate or conditioned? 
Abused by Heathcliff and Frances, cultivated resentment.

Mischievous in childhood, but not immoral or evil.

Criminality as perceived by other characters others him and the gaze makes him conform to their views.

Penalised for normal behaviour due to otherness.

Catherine treated better and punished less for the same things.

## How has Catherine changed during her time at Thrushcross Grange? How do the other characters respond to her change?

Now able to see the social divide between her and Heathcliff -> now HC notices as well

Shows class and gender ass a taught and preformative social construct, not innate

Appearance, dress, manners

Change in character based on class and gender expectations

But the authentic self is simply hidden, never completely removed

Wuthering Heights' effects on the characters in revealing and corrupting its inhabitants--metaphor for the privacy of the home for abuse and the stifling effects in society in cultivating the abuse.

Symbiotic relationship between WH and HC+Catherine

Class doesn't maintain goodness and ensure it, but corrupt it: either by enforcing itself or pushing others away form it/hiding behind it for their evil acts.

Lintons see themselves as saviours of the residents of WH, but make things worse.

Nature is not moral

## How is Nelly’s grooming of Heathcliff racialised? 

Wants him to become more like the 'respectable' residents of WH

Sense of superiority and all-knowing

Nelly from a servant family wants to be a superior class so makes Heathcliff lower by referring to race.
She does however, try to make him part of the family in a way she never could. But, narrative unreliability.

Literal things like the compliments and advice.

What is she not telling us?

Postcolonialism and Orientalism apply very nicely here.

| Postcolonial criticism                                       | Orientalist criticism                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| “like black fiends” –> linking darkness with immorality      | Exoticising  non-western cultures                            |
| Black/Bonny dichotomy she builds                             | “prince in disguise”, “Emperor of China…Indian Queen”        |
| idea of who you are on the inside “a good heart” reflects on what you look like externally. | clumsy, unrealistic. Making up his background FOR HIM and projecting onto him. He is now the master of the household, so perhaps she is doing this retroactively/in hindsight. |
| Othering                                                     | Othering                                                     |

Condescending, implicit superiority. ‘yes, you might be a prince etc. etc. but I am still better than you’

Unreliability: they do not seem on such good terms at the present and HC doesn’t speak glowingly of Nelly as a friend or someone who wanted to help.

Nelly is trying to mould Heathcliff into something she sees as appropriate

## Why does Brontë end Chapter 7 with Nelly and Lockwood speaking to each other in the present day?

Remind the reader that this is an account of an account and unreliable in many ways.

“except those in Greek, and Latin, and in French.” Similar to when she says she knows everything about Heathcliff, except x and x and x.

Foreshadowing to what she will talk about next as something unpleasant as she tries to stop and make it shorter.

- more doubt to the reliability of the next part
- suspense about what will happen next

Foregrounding that this narrative is a result of Nelly’s self-editing and retrospective guilt. She might be making this more interesting and entertaining by purposefully drawing from tropes and styles, while making herself less implicit.

reading books –> awareness of literary tropes and techniques



**Lockwood as an audience** making demands and Nelly struggling to meet them and make herself look good.

