---
title: ch 10-11
tags: [Notebooks/English/texts/Wuthering Heights]
created: '2021-03-14T21:41:40.994Z'
modified: '2021-03-14T21:51:16.099Z'
---

# ch 10-11
## Chapter 10

How is Wuthering Heights shown to be physically or emotionally corrupting? You can use examples from other sections of the text as well.


What gaps or inconsistencies are there in Nelly’s story?


Why do you think Catherine forces Linton and Heathcliff’s hands together? Think about Catherine’s motivations and Brontë’s intentions as a writer.
- Catherine wants to both have her cake and eat it, as it were.
- Brontë perhaps wants to make a point as to the forceful shoving-together of incompatible people (both socially and character-wise) by others?

In what ways has Heathcliff changed or not changed during his absence?
- He is still resentful and mischievous
- He appears much more confident and aware
- He is still very harsh on people

How is Catherine’s relationship with Linton presented?
- As one where Catherine gets almost everything she wants and puts Linton in uncomfortable situations

How is Isabella Linton characterised?
- As childish and more innocent, someone the others see as needing to protect.

## Chapter 11

How are Hindley and Hareton presented at the beginning of this chapter? What is Brontë showing through the change in their characters? 
- Small child Hareton begins to curse at Nelly and is violent towards her.
- Reference to threats of violence
- Brontë is showing the effects which WH has on people and the effect Heathcliff is purposefully causing
- Hindley is portrayed as losing much of his power and authority 

Why does Heathcliff become angry on p. 111-2? Think about what we are told explicitly and what you can infer from the novel as a whole.


In what ways does Brontë present Catherine and Heathcliff as wild and uncontrollable?
- They are both very passionate and verbally harsh to each other
- They both act as if they can take anything they want
- They are physically threatening and unnerving, Heathcliff's strength and threats and Catherine's purposeful fits of rage.
- They both attempt to manipulate people and grow angry when it fails

Why does Catherine lock herself, Nelly, Linton and Heathcliff in the room together? Think about Catherine’s motivations and Brontë’s intentions as a writer.


How does Brontë contrast Linton’s weakness and Catherine’s passion? Find quotes and examples and explain what devices Brontë uses to characterise the two figures.


