---
tags: [en/texts/Candide, en/writing]
title: ch 26-27 Candide paragraphs
created: '2021-01-26T11:43:47.957Z'
modified: '2021-02-01T16:39:18.548Z'
---

# ch 26-27 Candide paragraphs
## How are wealth and power presented in Chapters 26 and 27 of *Candide*?

Power is presented as a temporary and easily lost thing which is wrongly valued along with wealth. By chance, Candide and Martin find themselves in the presence of six deposed kings. Voltaire satires the idea that a king is the most powerful person in a country, and thus the institution of monarchy, by presenting six kings—each with an equal claim to sovereignty—at the same time, in the same place. By showing the deposed kings as each being part of similarly miserable lives like Candide’s, and their families all part of a struggle for power, the common idea that power makes a person more secure and stable is challenged by Voltaire. Each of the kings has a similar story of losing their immense power to someone else, so that they might gain it. Furthermore, the kings themselves gained their power by someone else losing it. This goes to show that power is presented as transferable and easily lost. While each king is treated with respect by their servants, the display of reverence seems ironic and false after each king reveals he has been deposed and lost all dignity. The kings still wish to keep their appearance of power and do so with their servants. The sixth king’s misfortunes go to present power as definitively not fixed to one person. He loses all his power and might “spend the night in prison” if he is “not careful”, showing that the power of the individual, however great it might have been, is never permanent and never greater than the power of a group. Martin’s comment that “it is quite common for kings to be deposed” further brings the satire on royal power, and Candide’s wonder that one of them “had to accept alms from” him strengthens the presentation of claims to power as ultimately meaningless.

Wealth is similarly presented. Candide is able to “give a hundred times as much” as each of the kings despite being a “mere commoner”, and the disbelief of the kings that such a wealthy person could actually give this much to someone else satires the view that wealth comes with power and the legitimacy of kings. The “regal compassion” which moved the kings to donate two sequins each for the poorest king to buy some clothes and shirts is ridiculed as not true compassion, but an attempt of the kings to maintain their power as someone greater than the “commoner” by a display of wealth, which is then mocked unknowingly by Candide. Wealth and power are further presented as a vice of humans who hopelessly try to gain and keep it. The Levanite captain frees his slaves and changes his course for a diamond, and Candide is concerned with Cunegonde’s material riches when he tells Cacambo, “No doubt you have bought her a palace in Constantinople”. Instead of being worried primarily with Cunegonde’s well-being, Candide is more concerned that she is living in luxury with the wealth which he thinks can solve all problems. Although Candide is able to get most of the things he asks for with his wealth, he is often robbed of its true value—”sold him a diamond worth a hundred thousand sequins for fifty thousand”—and is not able to get what he really wants: he does not gain Cunegonde or Pangloss or the Baron back as they were, no amount of money could fix what they’ve experienced, and the king he helps will still be in dept and not a king in power. Cacambo’s given wealth being completely lost in freeing Cunegonde and being “casually relieve[d]” from by pirates further presents wealth as easy to lose and gain. The captain’s rash altering of the course to Constantinople before Candide could finish upon hearing the offer of fifty thousand sequins is an example of the willingness to do anything for more wealth and power. Finally, wealth and power are portrayed as ultimately insignificant to what they represent: Candide pays more to free two slaves than he does to the king. This both mocks the value of wealth and the significance what power is worth and deserves.