---
title: ch 8-9
tags: [en, Notebooks/English/texts/Wuthering Heights]
created: '2021-03-10T08:57:56.164Z'
modified: '2021-03-15T14:23:20.083Z'
---

# ch 8-9
## Nelly describes WH as "An infernal house", how does Bronte present WH as hellish and immoral.

Hindley is being abusive to his son.

He an alcoholic.

"The servants could not bear his [Hindley] tyrannical and evil conduct". Hindley's mourning over Frances leads to him releasing his anger on others and himself.

"He cursed and defied  - execrated God and man and gave himself up to reckless dissipation."

Catherine becomes physically violent towards Nelly and Hareton, and becomes entitled and manipulative (she is disturbed and upset when others don't let her get away from her hypocrisy)

Heathcliff becomes sadistic and lets his resentment out by watching Hindley fall "past redemption"

The inhabitants are all tortured and torturing each other/revelling in the other's suffering.

Class consciousness, aware of social hierarchy and rules

## Why might Heathcliff have tried “to convey an impression of inward and outward repulsiveness”?

He has internalised the negative views others held from him

Projecting his bad treatment to others

His repulsion of others means he wants to make himself repulsive so he does not have to deal with them

Isolation –> due to setting ans outsider status

Awareness of social class and inability to be accepted by society

## Relationship between Catherine and Heathcliff

two sides of Catherine’s character and future life

Names carved into windows -> foreshadowing as she chooses her path and life consequences

Increasing independence from childhood companion

Changing dependency towards Edgar

Awareness of life away from WH

TG seems idyllic/utopian but hides corruption — WH  displays corruption clearly

Repress emotions to fulfil social expectations of class and gender

## Do you agree with Nelly that the brutal, violent, passionate behaviour is Catherine’s “genuine disposition”

In the way which she is presented, yes. But this could be narrative unreliability and Nelly’s dislike of her.

Tried to change in TG but couldn’t maintain it.

Even in early childhood, Nelly hints at her being manipulative, selfish, and entitled.

However, this could be the social conditioning. It is not that it is a natural disposition, but a genuine one.

## Why does Linton return to WH after Catherine’s outburst

Perhaps he likes it

He wants to be this upper class saviour character, saviour-complex: bringing Catherine back into acceptable society

Catherine is “his idol”, he is infatuated with her.

Nelly could be blowing everything up because she dislikes Catherine. Would Edgar really return if Catherine’s behaviour had been as bad as she described it to be, perhaps it was just a heated argument.


## 9
Why does chapter begin with Hindley throwing Hareton down the stairs before recounting Nelly and Catherine's talk?
- Symbolic of Hareton's degradation and descent by being thrown by others
- Edgar's stability compared to violence/immorality/fear of WH
- Humanity of Heathcliff, he catches Hareton even though it was an opportunity for revenge; it suggests his instinct and impulse is to save and be good, even though he later regrets it: he is conditioned to be bad and spiteful

What motivates Catherine's marriage to Edgar?
- "handsome, young, cheerful, rich" and "loves" Catherine
- even if she doesn't love him, she is loved by him and he offers an escape

