---
tags: [phil/core theme/essay]
title: E04
created: '2021-02-01T11:38:29.997Z'
modified: '2021-02-01T16:38:47.485Z'
---

# E04

The stimulus shows an illustration of two figures who appear to be people. This ability to recognise other humans through appearance might indicate that the body of a human is what makes them human, not some non-physical mind which we cannot observe. Furthermore, this relationship between mind and body might affect the way we live our lives as is shown by the stimulus' depiction of the two figures lounging and smoking, seemingly only concerned with material enjoyment and not, perhaps, with the discipline of the body—this might directly oppose the ascetic idea. However, one recognises that the figures in the stimulus are not actually human, simply shaped like them. This might suggest that there is something more to being human than just the body, perhaps some mind. In this essay I will discuss the possibilities of humans being composed of only a physical substance, or of a physical body and mental mind. Furthermore, I will discuss how this relationship between body and mind might affect the way we should live our minds and the implications it holds for the question of what it means to be human. 

 

From the stimulus it is clear that the illustrations are not real humans. Even though we recognise that they are shaped to suggest human people, there appears to be something missing from the stimulus which allows one to recognise it is not a true depiction of a human. It is not simply that the image is an image, because a sculpture or very realistic depiction of a human in real life is still not human. Though we may be fooled initially, it soon becomes clear that the imitation of a human cannot realistically make us believe it is a human. This missing aspect might be a non-physical mind. There appear to be mental and physical states for humans, but not for non-conscious or non-living things. For example, a person might have mass and volume, but also has a mental state of feeling some emotion, or of intentionality—thought directed at an something—when thinking. While these two states do not by themselves indicate there are separate substances, they do require some explanation. In the case of the stimulus, then, perhaps the evident lack of mental states is what makes it recognisably not human, but the physical properties we see in it makes us recognise it attempts to depict a human. One possible explanation for why a sculpture or very realistic simulation of a human by something might be that it lacks some mental property. 

 

One possible conclusion to draw from this is that the mind and body might be separate. When we consider the way in which we live, there appears to be some mental part of us which is removed from but linked to our body. Furthermore, when considering rationality and irrationality this idea that the mind and body might be different in nature might become more strengthened. If rationality is objectivity, the ability to see something without our perspective in the world and see it as it is, allowing us to make reasoned decisions then there might necessarily be a separation between mind and body. If the mind is physical or the body, it cannot be removed from a perspective to consider something objectively as It would be, by nature, an irremovable part of the physical thing it considers. 

 

Further, when considering one's existence it does initially appear that there is something thinking which is us, not just a body. Descartes' radical doubt leads to consider that the only indubitable truth about one's existence is that they think, therefore there must be something thinking due to the principle of sufficient reason: there is a sufficient reason/cause for everything. This thinking thing is what one is in the cogito ergo sum. This thinking part has no reason to be in the body or to be the body, and can be isolated from the body in the cogito. Therefore, as the mind and body can be considered separately in isolation—a body without a mind, and a mind simply thinking—the two are "really distinct substances". They could both exist without anything else. Therefore, both are separate substances. This allows us to have some sense of rationality by being removed from the physical which the mind considers, and also distinguishes between what is a real human and an imitation of one. 

 

However, one might recognise something as not human because it has no mental states and there not be a necessary distinction of substance between the mental and physical. There is an apparent link between being human and having a human body. Mental states do not need to be in a human, there might be no reason why an animal with mental states has a mind. The objection that we cannot know if an animal has a conscious mind can equally apply to other humans. There is no justification for anything other than the self being a thinking mind in Descartes' dualism other than the theological belief that God's goodness would not deceive us. Perhaps, cartesian dualism falls into solipsism then. In this case, there is no mind-body distinction to being human, as what we consider to be human is not. It is only the solipsist self which has a mind and everything else is not. Further, because the mind is not physical, there is an issue of how to perceive is something has a mind and how the two interact. Descartes' interactionist solution via the pineal gland I do not find satisfactory; if the two substances can interact, perhaps they are not really distinct substances. A mind in isolation cannot think of anything if thought is directed at something via Husserl's intentionality thesis. Therefore, if a mind in isolation cannot think, then it is not really existent. There is no indubitable proof that a mind is thinking. 

 

Another solution is the possibility of there only being the physical. Dennett's functionalism redefines the mind as a collection of functions which we call consciousness. The idea of the mind is generated from the functions attempting to recognise themselves, not by being some separate substance. Cartesian dualism then is an incorrect self-recognition of cognitive functions which give consciousness. In reference to the stimulus, then we would recognise that the image does not have such functions or mental states, and so is not human. Consciousness does not need to be in the form of a human body's functions. So to recognise a human is a combination of recognising a human body and a human consciousness. Recognising other minds is possible thorough heterophenomenology: considering other's experiences through the third person allows us to gain an understanding of consciousness. While this might not explain the hard problem of consciousness, the question the stimulus raises is not why consciousness arises. The relationship between body and mind might be adequately explained by the functions of them. 

 

To conclude. 

 

 
