---
tags: [en/writing]
title: E1 Commentary on Prologue to The Secret History
created: '2020-09-24T21:48:40.275Z'
modified: '2021-01-22T14:52:18.853Z'
---

# E1 Commentary on Prologue to The Secret History
The prologue to *The Secret History* is brilliant in its purpose: it captures the attention of the reader by proposing multiple alternatives for the main tensions and themes which will follow, develops the character of the narrator so far as to enable reasonable doubt on his reliability, and allows the reader to question the reasons for his confession of aiding a murder.

The structuring of the prologue is one way in which this is achieved. In the first sentence, the reader is already told that someone, Bunny, “had been dead for several weeks” and that only then did the narrator’s group realise the “gravity” of the consequences. This is contrasted by the casual “you know” used at the end of the following sentence when describing how the body was not found for ten days. This juxtaposition of apparent understanding and seriousness against the relaxed and almost carefree tone of the second sentence brings to question the true understanding of the narrator and his feelings towards this, so far, mysterious event. The last sentence of the first paragraph is then structured with an increasing unreliability of the scale of the manhunt for Bunny, first “state troopers”, and last of all “people…as far away as Boston”—this makes the reader understand the gravity of this manhunt more than what the narrator appears to be; the almost excited and perhaps boastful attitude of the scale of the manhunt plays into the casual “you know” from before to make it appear even more so as if the narrator does not understand the seriousness of this event, only the scale.

The prologue is further structured for irony and shock. Following this display of scale—the tricolon followed by asyndetic listing increasing in distance and size until the manhunt appears almost touristic causes the increase of scale to seem to have no indication of when it will end by lack of articles until the final member “Boston” abruptly ends the list to a impactful end of the paragraph—which leaves the reader unaware of the narrator’s involvement, it might even appear as if the narrator was aiding in finding Bunny, it is revealed that “we hadn’t intended to hide the body”. This revelation is structured by the author such that the narrator is now seen as deceptive and concealing the truth, aside from making excuses. This continues throughout: the narrator reveals some information only for it to be brought into question or later appear deceptive. The narrator even tells the story set up for dramatic irony. The reader is well aware that Bunny is going to be murdered and dumped in a ravine, and the entire manhunt which took place, before we are introduced to Bunny, who innocently asks “What  are you doing up here?”. This also furthers Henry’s deception: his answer, “Why, looking for new ferns”, now obviously false—it was “Henry’s modest plan” to murder. The lack of description needed when the events in the plot of the prologue actually chronologically occur means the reader visualises the events without prompt and suggests the narrator is reluctant to actually describe Bunny’s murder. This tension between deception and the telling of truth is expertly weaved into the structure though the constant cause for doubt over the reliability of the narrator and the ironic set up of the plot as it is told and as it occurs chronologically.

The insight given by a first-person narration in the style of a confession allows the reader to fully explore the psyche of him. The development of character he presets us as his own goes from being passive and unaware to an almost dissociative state, and finally a confession which is still littered with denial, “It is difficult to believe”, “in which I was partially responsible”. The narrator tries to make himself appear very self-aware, the lexical choice of doubting the past and questioning it objectively now gives him this effect. However, the language and structure appears as if he is trying to make a story out of the events instead of retelling them, this indicates a wish to distance himself from the events and make the reader not view the events as his reality but rather a tale. This use of the unreliable first person narrator, reflecting on and retelling events, allows the author to further link the themes of unreliability and deception and the tension between truth and falsehood into the way it is narrated itself. The way the narrator refers to Bunny is consistently as “the body” apart from when he is still alive and the introduction of him in the first sentence. This contrast between names for the living and dead suggests a divide between life and death. This theme of the battle between the Thanatos and Eros is also underlying throughout the characters and the narrator. The narrator’s guilt and disbelief that he was able to “have walked through it—the cameras, the uniforms…” is mixed with a sense of relief that he feels by not “incurring a blink of suspicion”, the word “incurring” suggests something undesirable. This relief at survival, at the cost of and through death, is furthered by the lack of names other than Henry and Bunny. We are not even made aware of the narrator’s name. It is not important that we know who the narrator is—perhaps also out of a sense of self-preservation—because it is the group’s drive to live at the cost of Bunny’s death through Henry’s plan. This is both a conflict within the narrator and externally: his Eros wills him to live and create more life by preserving himself (through this confession to attempt to “walk away” at last and for he feels it is “the only story I will be able to tell”), his Thanatos to allow Bunny’s murder and his current unreliability and deception.

Furthermore, the narrator’s use of imagery and the setting used by the author serves as a metaphorical allegory for the events and as a further indication of an unreliable narrator and thematic tensions. The image of hiding in the amorphous “underbrush” of a pine forest, of “whispering” and plotting is juxtaposed by the following simile “like a family on vacation” as they drive away. Again, the narrator distances himself and attempts to absolve the blame by making Henry the active person driving “clench-jawed”, almost parental, while the others are described by him as “talking like children”—another symbol for both life and innocent truth. The disregard for the wider perspective, by simply describing the manhunt “like ants in a sugar bowl” and a shapeless mass of mayhem, combined with the disregard for personal identification, brings a sense of distancing of the narrator. We are not aware, like him, of what the events happening actually are. Now, the narrator’s apparent awareness of his previous mental state, of having “been there all the time” and that the “picture…will never leave me”, makes us contemplate if the narrator is actually telling the story as it is, or using it as a way to distance himself more from the events or remove his past blame; some parts may indicate he was aware of what was happening, and only afterwards convinced himself he was not: “the long terrible night which lay ahead”, the plotting, planning, and the whispering all suggest an awareness of the “gravity of our situation” well before the narrator claims to have obtained it and even further before properly acknowledging it. The analogy of melting snow uncovering the body of Bunny, of the mountain becoming bare after the truth is found, perfectly captures the theme of the prologue: that over time, the revelation of the truth will come, even if it is obscured or packed in deeper by the reader and narrator as when the search party found “that they had been walking…over his body until the snow above it was packed down like ice.”

Overall, the prologue does what it sets out to do very well; leaving more questions while appearing to give the answers of what occurred at the surface, and setting up the unreliable narrator, themes, and tensions—internal and external—on the deeper level of analysis.
