---
tags: [en/texts/Jerusalem, en/writing]
title: 'E1: A1 Byron presentation'
created: '2020-11-23T20:59:32.270Z'
modified: '2021-01-03T12:43:30.448Z'
---

# E1: A1 Byron presentation
### Discuss the presentation of Rooster Byron in Act 1 of Jerusalem.

Butterworth presents Rooster Byron to the audience as an oxymoron: he is both distasteful and amoral yet a lovable character with a sense of a personal honour. Representing the contrast between archetype and reality, the analysis of Rooster as a character enables the audience to comprehend the failures of social structures and the irony inherent in them. Thus these oppositions serve as a hook for a deconstruction of what the viewer takes as reality.

From the very beginning, Butterworth’s stage directions indicate the playwright's authorial intent to characterise Rooster as the overwhelmed resistance to social oppression. The imagery of an “old Wessex flag” and “‘Waterloo’” sign are one of the first glimpses the audience receives of Rooster’s character. By first showing his surroundings, Butterworth allows the reader to gauge an insight into Rooster’s psyche before his first appearance.

The setting of “England at midnight…in a moonlit wood” combines with the symbolism of the Wessex flag—representative of one of the original kingdoms in Anglo-Saxon England—as a picture of national cultural history, to create a nostalgic sense of the past and an almost fairy tale-esque archetypal setting. This may have generated a psychological association to this concept in the audience’s access to the collective unconscious, but by juxtaposing this with the “deafening bass” the night before we see this properly and “Lots of junk” littering the scene afterwards, Butterworth subverts the expectation before it is fully formed. This immediately creates a conflict of what we do not expect to be the archetype of a fable being one in some way, and yet polluted by “American” litter.

The association of Waterloo with a great victory over a mighty military power further sets the scene for Rooster to be perhaps a General against invasion or oppression. The introduction of Fawcett and Parsons as representatives of the oppressive state with a bureaucratic and self-righteous attitude just before the audience’s first sense of who Byron is further builds this expectation.

The explicitly Americanised litter however recreates a nationalistic sentiment of aversion towards the apparent cultural imperialism of the United States by how even its “old American-style fridge[s]” have invaded the otherwise perfect and Romantic idea of a natural state of beauty, the English forest. In a way, the audience registers that this battle against state oppression is a futile one which has already been lost by the forming of a cultural hegemony.

This build-up creates a startling confusion for the audience upon the actual first introduction of Rooster. After the “dog” interrupting the state-representatives, “A head appears, wearing a Second World War helmet with goggles...Barking.” This the audience registers as Rooster: confusingly he is wearing a helmet as if in war, a clear allusion to the previous association of some sort of cultural resistance, but is acting like a literal barking dog and madman. The idea of resistance to state oppression through the gentrification of the area is evident in the disruption Rooster is causing, but it does not seem to be his intention. Neither does it seem he cares about any cultural oppression, only for himself.

Immediately however, the audience sympathises and is attracted to Rooster as the archetypal fool and rebel. His charisma and reactionary stance to Kennet and Avon and the privileged upper class, going so far as to call them “sorry cunts on the New Estate” aligns Rooster with the audience as a likeable character due to his ridiculousness juxtaposed with satirical formality. Although the perhaps subconsciously built previous expectations of what Rooster could be were oxymoronic and still somehow completely subverted, there is still some sense that Rooster truly is this resistance conjured by the Waterloo symbolism and Romantic imagery of the setting contrasted with the rubbish. That even though the apparent cultural hegemony has been built, Rooster’s sane madness and irresponsibility somehow breaks through this in a bubble of winning resistance.

This binary opposition between the formal and informal, oppressive responsible normality and freeing individual irresponsibility, drawn by the presentation of Rooster in Act 1 therefore serves to the deconstruction of what is expected to be the solution to the gentrification and cultural imperialism which dominates the context of the play.

The presentation of Rooster as an amoral and yet honourably individually moral character comes second to this social function to the audience of him. By identifying Rooster as the rebellious fool, the audience is immediately consciously drawn to his charisma and function as a character rather than consciously to his function as a point of social contrast. Rooster’s outlandish lies as excuses for being unavailable “on account of the fact he’s in Barbados this week with Kate Moss,” having done “Unspeakable acts”, and insistence that it the party was “a gathering” or he “had a quiet one” further identifies Rooster with the fool. Furthermore it identifies his amoral attitude towards lying and lack of regard for social convention, while preserving his nature as a likeable character by so far not displaying any perceived evil acts or flaws, simply hilarious attitudes and excuses. This is furthered by the long stage descriptions of what Rooster has for his breakfast and hygiene. Although the audience recognises that Rooster is an easily dislikeable person to be around for extended periods, they retain their attraction to Rooster as a likeable character.

The sense of a code of honour or pride is seen during the conversation where Rooster turns his confrontation of whether he knows where Phaedra is, and his drug and alcohol selling to underage children into a criticism of Wesley for doing the same and hypocritically claiming it is “different” simply for doing it in a capitalistically accepted way by doing so in the form of a precariously legal business,  a pub. Butterworth builds on a presentation of Rooster as a father-figure—typically the head of a family in social norms and as the caring yet not pampering family figure—by this confrontation that at least he accepts what he does unlike Wesley. This however is oxymoronic, as it is evident that Rooster does not accept what he does, as seen by his lack of care for the truth in withholding his knowledge, or lack thereof, of Phaedra’s location and constant lying to avoid responsibility. Nonetheless, because the previous was hidden by jest, the audience does not fully register this inherent hypocrisy, and becomes convinced by Butterworth’s presentation of Rooster as a caring (in an unconventional way) figure by providing a place for the younger generation to not “sit in the bus stop, shivering their bollocks off”. This sense of parental protection or provision is further seen by the audience when Pea “kisses Johnny on the cheek” and thanks him “for letting us stop over.” This builds a sense that Rooster has a sense of honour through his defence of himself and of others, and that he is not noble in the typical Jungian archetypal way of the fool or the hero, but honourable in his amoral code of parental protection.

This concludes to a conflicting image of Rooster as the overwhelmed yet overwhelming resistance to oppression by the state through gentrification, and hegemony by foreign cultural influence; the already lost yet somehow naively winning force; and the hypocritically moral code of an amoral man as a parental figure to an entire generation. He is therefore both a social application for the deconstruction of social structure, and an internal force of contrast within the play.
