---
tags: [en/texts/Jerusalem, en/writing]
title: 'E2: Play emotional response'
created: '2021-01-03T12:31:37.905Z'
modified: '2021-01-08T09:31:53.581Z'
---

# E2: Play emotional response
### “A play should make you laugh or should make you cry.” With reference to Jerusalem, discuss the methods Jez Butterworth uses to generate an emotional response in the audience.

Butterworth is able to generate an imitation of the despair the characters in Jerusalem experience in the audience through various methods of creating and showing humour. The audience vicariously experiences the characters’, shame, and despair at their escapism. Furthermore, by changing the way humour is made and showed, the audience experiences a broader range of emotions and both gains a greater understanding of the characters’ minds and the class distinctions in English society. 

Firstly, Butterworth uses the stage to simultaneously create humour and despair in the audience. Butterworth immediately juxtaposes the setting of the Prologue and the beginning of Act One visually and aurally. By interrupting Phaedra’s performance of the song Jerusalem with “Thumping music” and having her “flee”, the audience is immediately drawn to question where the thumping music is coming from; immediately afterwards the curtain rises to reveal “A clearing in a moonlit wood” and the source of “deafening bass” coming from “an old forty foot mobile home”. The sharp contrast of simple unaccompanied singing against the immense loudness which was visually fled to is certainly humorous, even more with “people dancing wildly, with abandon”. It is hard to reconcile the folk-lore imagery of the “moonlit wood” with the madness of the rave in the forest, especially so in the next arrangement of the stage. The idyllic setting degraded by deteriorating furniture and “Lots of junk” is a forceful composite of superficial cheap Americanised consumer culture—the “old American style fridge” and “Coca-Cola plastic chairs” and useless items littered on the floor—with British nationalism, signified by the old Wessex flag, Waterloo sign and previous singing of Jerusalem, and of natural and created states. The sensory juxtaposition in the stage directions allows for a release of emotion in laughter or humorous reaction to the mess which is the set, further satirised by the contrasting ideas of what England is. 

By producing this effect in the audience, Butterworth is able to bring to light the oppositions in broader society and British culture; the mess which is the characters’ environment is a representation of our own surroundings. Further oppositions allow Butterworth to directly satirise attempts at control. Parsons and Fawcett are “dressed the same”, a symbol of uniformity opposing the irregularity of the stage design, and “gingerly” navigate the landscape. The audience perceives the two Community Liaison Officers’ evident displeasure and ineffective bureaucracy as a humorous contrast to the familiarity Byron projects in this chaos. The irritability of Fawcett and Parsons very obvious in the way they behave: when Fawcett “touches up her lipstick” it plays into the idea of wanting to both look better than the other and behave better to show superiority and control—something which she ironically loses by doing this—and the mostly short and quick sentences which Butterworth writes them to say when speaking to Byron furthers this; when combined with Byron’s large speeches and familiar chaotic speaking manner, this becomes more evident. This opposition between the oppressive state having control yet the representatives lacking it, Fawcett and Parsons, and the opposite for the oppressed classes, Byron, is a comedic contrast which brings to attention the irony of the current social organisation through the humour of the characters’ situations. More so, it allows us to gain an understanding of the character’s minds in how they use humour or are used as humour. 

Although all the characters are certainly being used by the playwright, there is an important distinction between the characters which are written to be willingly funny, and those who are purposefully written to be perceived as humorous but not as trying to. This is clearly seen in the previous example and in the failed attempts of character’s humour, such as when Byron fails to make Dawn laugh. This applies further to the opposition of control, and also offers an alternative possibility of the humour’s function. This difference in the way the characters are written also applies to the environment created on the stage; when Rooster mentions the surroundings as a joke, such as the scene with the golden drum, the humour created has a much different emotion than when we see the mess he is living in and the humour associated with that. This serves as a parallel to how humour and purposeful showing of irony in modern society is selective, in that we only notice our irreconcilable and despairing condition of Being and society’s state through humour, selecting those areas which we find are not too heavy and lightening their load, acknowledging them mockingly to perhaps avoid having to change. 

This method of avoiding the true situation is further reflected in Byron’s denial of his inevitable removal and possible incarceration, the younger characters’ literal escape to “Rooster’s woods”—even more strikingly so Phaedra’s—and the outrageous stories Rooster tells to avoid responsibility. That the audience finds a humour-masked sadness in this is telling of the state of current social issues: although the younger groups are outwardly having a good time, they have “nowhere else to go”, Phaedra seems cheerful but is forced into hiding and has nowhere to run to afterwards, and Byron’s stories hide the sadness of his inability to take responsibility or be anything more than the Fool who is seen as enlightened by other Fools. By structuring the method of generating humour to be different in many situations, Butterworth is able to express the helplessness of the characters and their attempts at escapism as ultimately fruitless. 

This willingness and wish to disbelieve the current situation and escape from reality is also reflected in the audience’s wish for Byron to succeed and remain where he is as he so confidently, yet disbelievingly, proclaims throughout the play. This wish that one could perform a suspension of disbelief, which is ultimately as far as the audience can come to suspend disbelief, is revealing to the characters’ own hidden ideas. Although one can try to imagine Byron as being successful in his curse and an army of giants and ancestors descending to save and destroy, the trying to believe is as far as the audience is able to reach given Butterworth’s use of humour in the play, especially through Rooster. To believe this story is similar to a combination of Davey and Ginger playing along to Rooster’s story about the giant, and Dawn’s simple statement “You were kidnapped by traffic wardens.” It is a simple summary of what Byron has said, without any true belief or attempt at believing, simply going along to avoid facing the truth of the situation; the audience recognises the lie underneath and is only able to want it to be true in the same way that Byron tries to at the end. Because of this, one does not find the final story which Rooster tells to no one but the audience humorous, but saddening. In doing this, Butterworth is able to use humour for its opposite effect, and cause the audience to notice even further the folly and escapism it attempts to be. This is a reflection of Byron himself at the end of the play, unable to fully believe his own lies as he playfully did before, yet trying to for a final escape. 

To conclude, Butterworth is able to subvert the usual effect of humour by its previous use throughout the play to strengthen the emotional response of despair and hopelessness the end of the final Act 3 creates and the characters slowly admit to themselves. The various methods of creating humour and using it further aim to demonstrate the escapism frequent in society and contradictions one would rather not face; by the various uses of humour and methods to create it, Butterworth produces an immense range of emotion in the audience and uses this intentional emotion to further the plot and almost mimetically imitate the characters’ own emotions and fall. 
