---
title: I ch 12-14
tags: [Notebooks/English/texts/Wuthering Heights]
created: '2021-03-21T18:46:55.997Z'
modified: '2021-03-21T22:51:51.676Z'
---

# I ch 12-14
## 12
Why does Brontë show Catherine starving herself? Think about Catherine’s motivations and Brontë’s intentions as a writer.
- Catherine's instability and pettiness is shown again, she is shown to be violent to others and willing to even starve herself to death out of spite and anger
- Nelly appears less responsible as Catherine shown as deranged

What elements of Gothic fiction does Brontë use in this chapter?
- Wild and abandoned, while imprisoning, setting (constant)
- Strange illness and madness
- Catherine locked in her room and Edgar stuck in books
- Catherine's surprising strength, almost supernatural/out of madness
- Catherine talks about how if she dies her spirit won't rest until it is with Heathcliff, ghosts and death 
- Social crisis
- The possible falsity of Catherine's illness, doubt about the real
- Her illness as *uncanny*, Nelly recalls her previous illness---this is something new and different but links to the past

Catherine says that she is “so changed” (p. 125). What could she be referring to? There could be more than one interpretation.
- Her attitudes towards Edgar and Heathcliff
- Her love/lack of love
- Her motivations
- Her mind, perhaps

Why does Catherine want to go to the moors and open a window? Think about Catherine’s motivations and Brontë’s intentions as a writer.
- The uncanny and supernatural, it is strange that she wants to open the window and claims to see WH from there
- As a way to then threaten to jump out
- As a tool for manipulation/to sell the scam, if it is one
- Perhaps if she has a fever then she wants to cool down
- Further the theme of the Gothic
- To further show how demanding Catherine is
- A way for Nelly to push forward the view that Catherine doesn't know what's good for her

Look at p. 126-8. Why do you think Catherine is so preoccupied with death?
- She is dying, perhaps
- She has a fever
- She recalls her father's death and the following trauma?
- As a reference to Gothic themes
- 

In what ways could Nelly be said to exhibit poor judgement in this chapter? How does this affect the reader’s view of her?
- She doesn't believe Catherine and is untruthful about many things
- Perhaps she is not being very truthful now, if she lied to keep up appearances then she might be doing much of the same now

## 13
How does Brontë show that Isabella’s status has fallen?
- She writes a letter to Nelly instead of anyone else, and is unable to write
- She says she has made a mistake

## 14
Why does Brontë have Heathcliff hang Isabella’s dog? Think about Heathcliff’s motivations and Brontë’s intentions as a writer.
- To very clearly visualise Heathcliff's sadism and cruelty, Heathcliff wants to hurt Isabella in place of Edgar and Catherine and take out all his anger, he is not a good person
- Heathcliff wants to leave a message to the family and frighten them
- To show the extent of Heathcliff's anger

Look at Heathcliff’s dialogue on p. 148. Are there any similarities between what he says here and how Catherine describes their relationship?
- He is as forceful as Catherine is and as certain of their love as Catherine was
- He claims he will do whatever it takes and never rest until he is with Catherine, similar to how she says even her spirit will seek out Heathcliff
- They are both threatening and frightening

Is Heathcliff a hero, an anti-hero or a villain? Is there a clear answer? Use examples to support your argument.
- Violent sexuality against Isabella
- Manipulative
- Villain, he is sadistic and abusive, and comes to forcefully take Catherine doing anything it takes
- He thinks himself a hero however
- Nelly is quite possibly making Heathcliff into more of a villain, yet Lockwood's account near the beginning might suggest it is not a massive exaggeration

Look at the bottom of p. 152, where Heathcliff talks about “duty and humanity”. What thematic similarities can you see between this section and Jane Eyre? How do the writers conform or differ in their depiction of these themes?
- Haven't read Jane Eyre, so I have no idea

How does Nelly defend her actions at the end of this chapter? Do you find her convincing? Why/why not?
- Claimed to refuse Heathcliff 50 times, which is unconvincing as she would have been very frightened if Heathcliff had really been as threatening. Either she quickly agreed or Heathcliff was not so violent
- Could have lied by agreeing and not doing anything, she has done similar things so not an outrageous suggestion
- Describes herself reflecting and struggling over the decision to make it seem a difficult one
- As she had previously described wanting Catherine to almost 'get what she deserves', I find it unrealistic that her loyalties change so much as to want to now protect her
- She now claims she thought it was "wrong, though expedient", as to suggest she knows better now


