---
title: I ch 01-5
tags: [en, Notebooks/English/texts/Wuthering Heights]
created: '2021-02-22T10:08:20.895Z'
modified: '2021-03-21T18:46:20.261Z'
---

# I ch 01-5
## Is lockwood a reliable narraor?
no, he admits to passing his own views onto others and misreading the situations often, and passes judgement very quickly.
he is an uninformed outsider who wants to hear some gossip
lack of direct knowledge
biased accounts of biased accounts.
subjective

naivete, poor judge of character (e.g. his impression of Heathcliff), unreliable self-perception (sees himself as a brooding misanthrope and in ch4 desparate to gossip with Nelly), and as tempting romantic prospect. Trying to make himself look like a brooding, mysanthropic and melancholy romantic hero.
poor powers of perception (thinks Heathcliff and Mrs h are married despite large age difference, mistakes dead rabbits for cats)


## Is nelly a reliable narrator?
no, passage of time
too involved with characters to be reliable

will she present herself accurateely?
limited information availiable to an external observer
servants not always privy to the private emotions and experiences of their masters
"I know all about it; except for...and...and.."

## characters 
Lockwood:
naive
shelterned
suthern
optimistic
lives a thrushcross grange in 1801

healthcliff:
bad tempered
experienced
curt
northern
lives in wuthering heights in 1801

## Heathcliff
- misanthrope
- difficult past
- dominant in household
- scary
- angry
- dissatisfied with world
- grief/loss
- isolated
- uncaring
- inhospitable
- outsider to some extent
- untrustwothy

## Hareton Earnshaw and Mrs Heathcliff
how are they all related?
why are they all in WH?
how did he lose the house?

## ch3
Catherine's father owned WH and died, catherine shared a childhood with Heathcliff.
Moors.
Difficuult and confused childhood.
Family wealth and status
Joseph portrayed as a villainous figure
Similarity between catherine and heathcliff
Hindley's mistreatment of Heathcliff
Heathcliff abused and tormented by almost everyone

Lockwood supposedly has an encounter with catherine's ghost.
subconscioussness influenced by diary?
ambiguity if it is real or not, Heathcliff seems to believe him immediately and it all occurs in the same room which Heathcliff has locked up for some reason.
The debate of if the supernatural is real or if it is a manifestation and construction to explain human psychology is a theme

## ch4-5
heathcliff found by catherine's father on the streets of liverpool. this is obviously suspicious, is he an illegitimate son? Liverpool was known as a bit of a hotbed for this because it is a port city during the slave trade and etc. etc.

Hindley and Catherine characterised as spoiled and upper class, self-centred.
Hindley- anger, abuse of Heathcliff.
Catherine- manipulative and clever
power struggle between the two siblings

Are we encouraged to doubt Nelly's narrative at all?

