---
tags: [en/texts/Orwell Essays, en/writing]
title: Orwell British imperialism
created: '2020-10-12T19:48:16.058Z'
modified: '2020-11-24T20:30:18.182Z'
---

# Orwell British imperialism


###### How does George Orwell reveal his attitude towards British imperialism in ‘A Hanging’ and ‘Shooting an Elephant’?

Orwell reveals his attitude of hating British imperialism in *A hanging* (1931) and *Shooting an Elephant* (1936). It is clear in the structure and modality of the writing that Orwell’s authorial intent is to convince the reader that “imperialism was an evil thing” and British imperialism, in Burma at least, was a sham to put up the appearance of control and authority. Furthermore, the literary techniques and sharp imagery used in the essay pushes the reader to more willingly adopt and draw the same mental images and thoughts which Orwell has by the narrative style of a story and allegorical nature of the essay causing the reader to draw their own conclusions which are pushed in a direction by Orwell.

The use of imagery clearly displays Orwell’s attitudes towards imperialism. The opening paragraph of *A Hanging* begins by describing the morning as “sodden”, and “sickly light, like yellow tinfoil, slanting” into the jail yard. We are immediately drawn into visualising the jail system of the British Empire in Burma as feverish and ill: the sickly light moves the image away from sunrise and sunset to a cheap, dying colour—emphasised by the “tinfoil”, forcing a connection to cheap metal. This has the further effect of draping the visual imagery of prisoners kept in “animal cages” as being in horrible conditions, covered in blankets and squatting next to bars. Although we do not know the conditions of the jail Orwell forces us to visualise it in this way at the very beginning of his essay, revealing his own attitude towards the jail system of the empire in the process. *Shooting an Elephant* also starts with an image designed to influence the reader, “sneering yellow faces” and “hideous laughter” at the representatives of enforcement of the empire’s power cause us to visualise the deep but “petty kind of…anti-European feeling” as a homogeneous and collective feeling with no result. This immediately makes the reader question the legitimacy of British imperialism. The juxtaposition of imagery of being “jeered” at with the “dirty work of Empire”—“wretched prisoners…stinking cages”, scarring caused by corporal punishment, “grey faces” (compared to “yellow faces”, as if now drained of life and old)—causes the reader to further form an image of a mass hate of imperialism by the Burmese people, but inability to do anything other than superficial jeering at its representatives. This is designed by Orwell to fill our minds while we read the rest of the essay: the hate of the empire but inability for any individual or even group to do anything. The imagery of chains and prisoners being bound fills *A Hanging*, causing the reader to view the jailers, representing imperialism, as literally jailing its empire and the people within it. It makes the reader make a link between oppression and constraint with imperialism, with the death of the prisoner a literal constraint as a noose is drawn tight and snaps his neck when dropped.

Structure and language of the essays also reveal Orwell’s criticism of British imperialism. The punctual and clear paragraphs in *A Hanging*, with deceptively straightforward language, gives the essay a greater sense of journalism and neutrality; it appears that Orwell is simply telling the events as they occurred. However, the essay is structured so that the lead-up and aftermath of the hanging take the most time, while the hanging itself is only a brief moment in the essay, “There was a clanking noise, and then dead silence.” This has the effect of making the event itself seem less significant than what it represents, and the shortness and immediacy of it reinforcing the swiftness of the actual death. This is then contrasted by the joking and “everyone…laughing” at Francis’ stories about when prisoners do not always die so swiftly. The effect is the reader reading the essay and comparing the very significant “one world less” of killing a person, which Orwell clearly states he finds wrong, to the very easy action it takes the empire to sacrifice people to maintain control. The emphasis on the dog, first joyful and carefree and later “conscious of having misbehaved itself” serves as a way for Orwell to further criticise British imperialism. The hanging of the prisoner, representing the punishment and control of the empire, is represented as seen to be wrong by even a dog, blaming itself for the hanging. Before, the dog represents innocence and blindness to differences in class and social status—the dog does not care it is playing with a condemned person, or that it is being chased in malice—but afterwards is seen as sad and docile and pacified. The structuring of the essay to pace so much emphasis on the dog is through the dog’s introduction as the man is led, then causing a significant delay, and then immediately after the hanging to be mentioned again is to emphasise the reactions of the dog to reveal Orwell’s view that even nature and blind, unaware innocence can see the evil of capital punishment and the empire enforcing it. The opening to *Shooting an Elephant* is structured to juxtapose the first and second paragraphs. This creates a startling effect of realising that British imperialism forces “utter silence” from those within it, dividing people who want the same thing by social position and hierarchy. Although Orwell is “all for the Burmese and all against their oppressors, the British” he cannot do anything about this, and is forced to conform to the idea that he must treat the Burmese as inferior and exercise his authority to never be “laughed at”. The critical language used towards the empire makes Orwell’s attitude clear, “oppressors”, “evil”, “dirty” to name a few examples. Surprisingly, the language to refer to the Burmese is not at all supportive, “sea of yellow faces”, “garish”, and “evil-spirited little beasts”. This conflict is described by Orwell as “normal by-products of imperialism”, further pushing Orwell’s view that there is a forced conflict of interest between being seen as the oppressor and doing the oppressing while not wanting to be, but being hateful of those who Orwell describes as trying to “make my job impossible”; irony is used to further implant into the reader the divide between wanting to do two things because the empire and imperialism forces one to do so.

The use of characterisation and modality in the essays also reveal Orwell’s critical view of imperialism. The Burmese are characterised as poor and “wretched”, perhaps even exoticised (“shooing away a crowd of naked children”) but consistently described negatively in *Shooting an Elephant* and to an extent in *A Hanging*. The modality of certainty of hating the empire and the contrast between equally certain language used to negatively describe the people who Orwell is “all for” serves to reveal the effects Orwell feels from imperialism. He reveals through the characterisation of Francis (*A Hanging*) and the officials (*Shooting an Elephant*) that even those who are Burmese and in positions of authority are seen as lesser to the British, white imperialist forces. The criticism of the Burmese doing much of the work with the British officials as almost puppets of the empire to put up appearance is evident though this. Even more so in *Shooting an Elephant*, where the opinion of the local Burmese is portrayed as almost an unstoppable force for the actions of the people who ought to be in the position of power over what is done as simply acting “to avoid looking a fool”. The hierarchy is even more evident in the phrase “but he was only an Indian and could do nothing.” The characterisation of other British officials is also a further criticism: the “younger men” who say it is a “damn shame to shoot an elephant” as it is “worth more than any damn Coringhee coolie” shows the reader Orwell’s opinion that imperialism dehumanises the people and due to its purpose of gaining a profit though an empire makes people view each other as a value of worth which can be extracted rather than what they are, people. Equally in *A Hanging*, where the already executed prisoners are viewed simply as stories to be told to relieve the tension of just having killed a person, and the Eurasian boy boasting of his “Classy European style” silver case “From the boxwallah, two rupees eight annas”: a contradiction of value of the superior and dominant European product measured by the local currency, the boy is boasting of his higher class by having this item yet talks of it in the currency of the area, a criticism of the hypocrisy of imperialism and the people who further it.

To conclude, Orwell reveals his critical attitude to British imperialism through the use of language, structure, characterisation, imagery and modality. He almost dishonestly hides this behind the appearance of an allegorical essay, giving the appearance of the reader being able to draw their own interpretation from the events Orwell retells in a style similar to the genre of investigative journalism. However, the essays are layered with authorial intent to urge the reader to make a conclusion similar to Orwell’s, and to understand Orwell’s criticism of the British empire and imperialism.
