---
tags: [en/poetry, en/skills, en/writing]
title: Titles writing
created: '2021-01-27T21:56:29.790Z'
modified: '2021-01-29T14:20:29.635Z'
---

# Titles writing

###### *Borges and I*, by Jorgue Luis Borges.

The title evokes the idea of introducing someone or telling a story of two different people; however, the poet and narrator are both named the same. This foreshadows an internal duality, which is explored in the poem through Borges as an author or public figure—the use of the surname is reminiscent of formal writing and addressing someone important—and Borges as "I": as the actual Borges who is known to himself as "I" and not as the public "Borges". The title also suggests an acquaintance between the two people, but in a professional relationship. The nature of this relationship is explored in the poem. "I" is also an immediate reality while "Borges" is more of an idea---the surname instead of a first name suggests that he is also almost a concept of a person. The idea of Borges as a concept is explored as the narrator describes giving his whole life to this idea of Borges. It is almost as if this idea only comes to life by the narrator giving his life to Borges. This parasitic relationship which “would be an exaggeration to say… is a hostile one” permeates the poem. Every reference to Borges is spiteful and regretful as if the narrator has no choice but to go along with the process of “giving over everything to him” even though he is well aware.

The professionalism of the relationship is also explored through the expression of the transfer as a way for the narrator to “survive in him.” This wish to not be “destined to perish, definitively” is a powerful emotion of self preservation which leads Borges to become Borges even if it is something he does not fully want. Furthermore, the justification which the narrator constantly tries to convince himself with is evocative of trying to justify a past decision which the outcome cannot be changed of, only the thoughts about it. The narrator convinces himself that “this literature justifies me”, later that he wishes to survive in some way and “long to persist”, and finally that he has a singular choice to lose everything “to oblivion, or to him.” This emphasis on justification is strengthened by directly mentioning Spinoza, as an example of attempting to justify his self preservation through something else. The irony is that in trying to do so he feels he has lost himself and no longer knows “which one of us has written this page.”

###### *Death of a Naturalist*, by Seamus Heaney

By including “Death” as the first word of the title, Heaney immediately builds the image that the subject of the poem is about some sort of death, something which is often mourned for. The preposition “of” also makes this death an implicit possession, something which is almost owned by the “Naturalist”. This owning of this death is explored in the poem as it is a result of the narrators own actions but not entirely a fault. The word “Naturalist” foreshadows the subject of the poem to be related to nature, this is explored both literally in the toads, animals, and landscape, and through the natural passing of time and change in taste and understanding. The poem explores the fascination with nature slowly fading away and being replaced with disgust and fear with the passage of time, something which is clear in the title, as a “Death” is both sudden and a natural progression of events. The poem feels like a nostalgic longing for past times where this naturalist perspective and child-like attitude, evidenced by the childish vernacular of “daddy frog…mammy frog” and “Miss Walls”, much like how someone might long for past times before a death took place. This contrast in attitude is shown by the  juxtaposed first and second stanzas. The first stanza is much longer and the lineation is shorter, like a child speaking quickly and extensively about something they love, while the second stanza is shorter and with loner lines similar to someone describing something they did not enjoy.

This feeling of lost love and innocence is present throughout the poem, as the beauty of nature is corrupted into something which the narrator finds disgusting and threatening, and feels that love for nature has died. This becomes a much more remorseful poem in the context of the title, which gives the poem a new light of someone having died and the sombre tone of a funeral-like poem of regret. When the two first impressions of the poem—the title and first line—are juxtaposed, death and the bright and colourful fullness of life, the contrast seems almost comedic; after the second stanza, the first seems ironically sad and becomes much more contextualised with the title. We recognise that the first stanza is the past, what is being mourned for, and that the second is the reality which was, and still is, faced by the narrator’s metaphorical “Death”.

