---
tags: [en/texts/The Vegetarian, en/writing]
title: To what extent does Han Kang create sympathy for the brother-in-law in The Vegetarian?
created: '2020-11-24T20:28:35.007Z'
modified: '2020-11-24T20:29:30.807Z'
---

# To what extent does Han Kang create sympathy for the brother-in-law in The Vegetarian? 
## context: only under half of part 2 read
 

By disclosing his negative traits which initially push the reader away, Han Kang simultaneously creates a sense of sympathy and distaste for the brother-in-law. The initial mirage of the perfect family unit and freedom of the brother-in law is shattered at the beginning of the second part of The Vegetarian, “Mongolian Mark”, to emphasise the key theme of misunderstanding: the sympathy created for the brother-in law and forced upon the reader is one of pity and realisation of the nuance of characters and the misunderstanding of them and within them. While his attitude and forcing of this sympathy is meant to make the readers dislike the brother-in law as the narrator, the sympathy which Han Kang creates juxtaposes his negative aspects to create a more shocking image of the human condition of misunderstanding. 

At first, one might argue that this is not the case; Han Kang does not create sympathy for the brother-in-law. The sharp juxtaposition of Mr Cheong’s description of the brother-in law and the brother-in law’s narration is clear authorial intent to undermine the reader’s previous understanding to the effect of not sympathising and view the brother-in law as almost deceptive in his own portrayal. His obsession with the Mongolian Mark as a symbol for innocence and childhood, something now inaccessible to the brother-in law as an adult in society, and his urge to free himself from a privileged life which he finds dull and boring is a direct example of how Han Kang attempts to undermine any sympathy for the brother-in law: we are not to sympathise with him for being in a difficult position but to see him as a man with a self-deprecating yet self-righteous position. His desire for more—to be more “pleased” than his wife makes him but no longer does, to possess what his “new wife was missing”, and the use of the free indirect discourse to show the mindset of wanting to have things and be more than others by the lexical choice of “lacking”, “missing”, “whose goodness is oppressive” and “nothing else would do as a substitute”—and obsession over the constructed “image” of Yeong-hye which he has no need to justify or critically examine because it is “so clear” yet “ beyond comprehension”, giving him an excuse for his perverse obsession through almost an artistic license to not have to explain himself or hold himself responsible because he finds this image “beautiful” and like a piece of art which has puts him “though this anxiety”. This is meant to undermine any sympathy for the brother-in law because of his views on others as ornamental items to decorate his life with, and as a person who uses his status as an artist to excuse his actions and thoughts. Kang’s use of narration then is a clear case of removing sympathy for the brother-in-law by portraying him as a man with a complex of victimhood and self-righteous suffering as an excuse for irresponsibility and exculpation. The free indirect has the effect of portraying the character and narrator’s opinions as unadulterated and objective fact; the brother-in law’s opinions are not. It is as if he is telling his own story and thoughts to someone else, his intent to portray himself as a victim fails purposefully for Kang to allow a deeper insight into the character’s psyche. The retelling of him getting “an erection…almost the first time since his marriage” with an “intense sexual desire…focused on a clear object” and the conclusion that it is him “attempting to throttle” and “thrusting himself into” Yeong-hye is a clear example of this. The perspective of him being above others and owning or possessing them as objects is clear in this startling image similar to the marital rape of Yeong-hye by Mr Cheong in the first part of The Vegetarian. While it might appear to make him “grimace” out of distaste at himself for feeling this way, it is clear that we are not meant to sympathise with him for this as he is later described as masturbating to Yeong-hye directly after the display of violence of her attempted suicide: the brother-in law finds almost a guilty pleasure but denies this in favour of the appearance of ascetic suffering and resignation, something which Kang intends to make the reader dislike and not sympathise with. 

Although this distaste at the brother-in law is true, it is not the case that it attempts to make the reader not sympathise with him. Kang creates both a distaste for the brother-in law and a sympathy towards a man who is trapped in society and failing in his insecurities. Kang intends for the reader to understand his situation and sympathise with the brother-in-law’s misunderstanding. The juxtaposition of Mr Cheong and the brother-in law’s perspectives are perhaps also to further the theme of misunderstanding and almost social typesetting, as well as explore the mental health and society of suffering in silence to build sympathy towards the brother-in law. His obsession with the Mongolian Mark and Yeong-hye is disturbing and an unhealthy release of his emotional misunderstanding caused in part by his dry marriage and stored self-hate, in this way Kang attempts to create sympathy by writing the brother-in law to realise this guilty pleasure and unhealthy release as what it actually is, but feels powerless to stop it. The questioning of if he is “a moral human being?” and consistent modality of doubt and anxiousness throughout builds a sense of sympathy for this man trapped in a society in which he is misunderstood and misunderstands others. This is evident in how he forces his self-hate onto his wife by describing her as “making an effort to not sound too put out” and as “demanding”, with the emphasis on the constant questions by In-hye as a signifier for his insecurities in how he sees others as also doubting and hating himself for his thoughts and miserable state of mind. The graphic description of wanting to “pummel his cheeks until the blood showed” and “smash his ugly lips, swollen with desire, with the sole of his show” as almost a punishment for the intrusive thoughts and urges which he does not want to have—and especially not enjoy, even though he does—and the violence of his imagination when thinking of having sex with Yeong-hye, along with the arousal at her blood staining his clothes, echoes to the dreams which Yeong-hye has. In this way, Kang builds some sympathy for the brother-in law by associating his obsession and urges with the dreams which distress Yeong-hye so much to hint at the suffering which he feels himself going through. The reader is also meant to view his dehumanising and objectifying outlook of others as a struggle for the brother-in law in itself, it goes against his passionate nature as the artist he views himself (unlike Mr Cheong) and makes the reader consider the brother-in law as a product of society and limited by society. His attraction to Yeong-hye as someone different, able to defy society and her innocence towards it, therefore is both a source of worry and disgust for the reader but also pity and sympathy: the brother-in law’s obsession is an unhealthy way for him to want to be free cathartically through her and to overcome his insecurities which he feels by his perfect opinion of In-hye. However, this may also prove to be false just as Mr Cheong’s view of the brother-in law was as she is described as constantly “exhausted” and perhaps lonely, further tying into the theme of misunderstanding. His silent suffering and hate of himself, exhibited by him struggling to accept he is the “middle aged man” in the window, another perfect example of misunderstanding himself and the social commentary on the danger of silent, solitary suffering by the projection of these feelings towards himself onto how he perceives others to see him, and how his urges manifest themselves in violence and obsession 

To conclude, Kang builds a consistent sense of sympathetic pity and understanding of the brother-in law while maintaining a sense of disturbance and dislike towards him. The constant sense of being misunderstood by others and society and limited by this expectation as well as participating in it by misunderstanding himself and others—the most obvious example being his romanticism of Yeong-hye and misunderstanding her as a person, and perhaps also In-hye by projecting himself onto her—and more importantly for sympathy, himself. The reader is lulled into a simultaneity between a distaste for the thoughts and views of the brother-in law but also a pity towards his condition in society and others. Many of the things which appear to diminish the sympathy towards him therefore increase it; we pity the brother-in law and sympathise with his guilt at pleasure and hate for this as a result of unhappiness.  

 
 
